RUM-3397 (otel-tracer) update otel instrumentation guide for Android (#23389)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/android/otel.md

---
title: Android and Android TV Custom Instrumentation using OpenTelemetry API
kind: documentation
description: 'Instrument your Android and Android TV application with OpenTelemetry API, to send traces to Datadog.'
aliases:
- /tracing/trace_collection/otel_instrumentation/android/
- /tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/otel_instrumentation/android
further_reading:
    - link: 'tracing/glossary/'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Explore your services, resources, and traces'
    - link: '/opentelemetry/guide/otel_api_tracing_interoperability'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Interoperability of OpenTelemetry API and Datadog instrumented traces'
---

{{% otel-custom-instrumentation-lang %}}

## Requirements and limitations

- You will have to download use the dd-sdk-android-trace and dd-sdk-android-trace-otel dependencies starting 

> with 2.12.0+

Reviewer: /informational

We must make sure during the release time, the real version is updated.

     RUM events.

   To update the tracking consent after the SDK is initialized, call: `Datadog.setTrackingConsent(<NEW CONSENT>)`.
   The SDK changes its behavior according to the new consent. For example, if the current tracking consent is `TrackingConsent.PENDING` and you update it to:
   * `TrackingConsent.GRANTED`: The SDK sends all current batched data and future data directly to the data collection endpoint.
   * `TrackingConsent.NOT_GRANTED`: The SDK wipes all batched data and does not collect any future data.

   Use the utility method `isInitialized` to check if the SDK is properly initialized:

   ```kotlin
    if (Datadog.isInitialized()) {
        // your code here
    }
   ```
   When writing your application, you can enable development logs by calling the `setVerbosity` method. All internal messages in the library with a priority equal to or higher than the provided level are then logged to Android's Logcat:
   ```kotlin
   Datadog.setVerbosity(Log.INFO)
   ```

3. Configure and enable Trace feature:

   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab "Kotlin" %}}

>    ```kotlin

Reviewer: /comment

Let's cleanup the extra spacing like in `{{` and ```

        val traceConfig = TraceConfiguration.Builder().build()
        Trace.enable(traceConfig)
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}

   {{% tab "Java" %}}
   ```java
        final TraceConfiguration traceConfig = TraceConfiguration.Builder().build();
        Trace.enable(traceConfig);
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}    

> 4. Datadog tracer implements the [Open Telemetry standard][18]. Create the OpenTelemetryTraceProvider and register the OpenTelemetrySdk as GlobalTelemetry instance in your application's `onCreate()` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Datadog tracer implements the [Open Telemetry standard][18]. Create the `OpenTelemetryTraceProvider` and register the `OpenTelemetrySdk` as GlobalTelemetry instance in your application's `onCreate()` method.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
GlobalOpenTelemetry.set(object : OpenTelemetry {
            private val tracerProvider = OtelTracerProvider.Builder()
                .setService([BuildConfig.APPLICATION_ID])
                .build()

            override fun getTracerProvider(): TracerProvider {
                return tracerProvider
            }

            override fun getPropagators(): ContextPropagators {
                return ContextPropagators.noop()
            }
        })
 // and later on if you want to access the tracer provider

>  val tracerProvider = GlobalOpenTelemetry.get().getTracer(instrumentationName = "<instrumentation_name>")

Reviewer: Given the fact, we don't do anything with `instrumentationName`, let's make it obvious by passing the empty string.

```suggestion
 val tracerProvider = GlobalOpenTelemetry.get().getTracer(instrumentationName = "")
```

Author: yes but in this case I want to stay consistent with Otel. Maybe later one we will use it for something. Not sure here

```
{{% /tab %}} 
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
GlobalOpenTelemetry.set(new OpenTelemetry() {
            private final TracerProvider tracerProvider = new OtelTracerProvider.Builder()
                    .setService(BuildConfig.APPLICATION_ID)
                    .build();

            @Override
            public TracerProvider getTracerProvider() {
                return tracerProvider;
            }

            @Override
            public ContextPropagators getPropagators() {
                return ContextPropagators.noop();
            }
        };
 // and later on if you want to access the tracer provider

>  final TracerProvider tracerProvider = GlobalOpenTelemetry.get().getTracer("<instrumentation_name>");       

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 final TracerProvider tracerProvider = GlobalOpenTelemetry.get().getTracer("");       
```

```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> Note: The `setService` method is used to set the service name for the tracer provider. The service name is used to identify the application in the Datadog UI. You can either use the GlobalOpenTelemetry to hold a single instance of the TracerProvider create your own instance of the TracerProvider and use it in your application code as needed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: The `setService` method is used to set the service name for the tracer provider. The service name is used to identify the application in the Datadog UI. You can either use the `GlobalOpenTelemetry` to hold a single instance of the `TracerProvider` create your own instance of the `TracerProvider` and use it in your application code as needed.
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
val span = tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "<span_name>").startSpan()
// do something you want to measure ...
// ... then, when the operation is finished:
span.end()
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
final Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("<span_name>").startSpan();
// do something you want to measure ...
// ... then, when the operation is finished:
span.end();
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

5. (Optional) Set child-parent relationship between your spans:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
let childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "response decoding")
    .setParent(Context.current().with(parentSpan)) // make it child of parent span
    .startSpan()

// ... do your logic here ...
childSpan.end()
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
final Span childSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("<span_name>")
    .setParent(Context.current().with(parentSpan)) // make it child of parent span
    .startSpan();

// ... do your logic here ...
childSpan.end();
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

6. (Optional) Provide additional attributes alongside your span:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin

> tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "<span_name>").setAttribute(key = "<key_name>", value = <key_value>).startSpan()

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "<span_name>").setAttribute(key = "<key_name>", value = "<key_value>").startSpan()
```

```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java

> tracer.spanBuilder("<span_name>").setAttribute("<key_name>", <key_value>).startSpan();

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tracer.spanBuilder("<span_name>").setAttribute("<key_name>", "<key_value>").startSpan();
```

Author: nope because if we put it like that will mean that <key_value> should always be a string which is not the case at least in Android API

---
title: Android and Android TV Custom Instrumentation using OpenTelemetry API
kind: documentation
description: 'Instrument your Android and Android TV application with OpenTelemetry API, to send traces to Datadog.'
aliases:
- /tracing/trace_collection/otel_instrumentation/android/
- /tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/otel_instrumentation/android
further_reading:
    - link: 'tracing/glossary/'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Explore your services, resources, and traces'
    - link: '/opentelemetry/guide/otel_api_tracing_interoperability'
      tag: 'Documentation'
      text: 'Interoperability of OpenTelemetry API and Datadog instrumented traces'
---

{{% otel-custom-instrumentation-lang %}}

## Requirements and limitations

> - You will have to download use the dd-sdk-android-trace and dd-sdk-android-trace-otel dependencies starting 

Reviewer 2: To add to @brett0000FF 's feedback:

```suggestion
- You need to download the `dd-sdk-android-trace` and `dd-sdk-android-trace-otel` dependencies starting 
```

   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}
   {{< /site-region >}}

   {{< site-region region="ap1" >}}
   {{< tabs >}}
   {{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
   ```kotlin
   class SampleApplication : Application() {
        override fun onCreate() {
            super.onCreate()
            val configuration = Configuration.Builder(
                    clientToken = <CLIENT_TOKEN>,
                    env = <ENV_NAME>,
                    variant = <APP_VARIANT_NAME>
                )
                .useSite(DatadogSite.AP1)
                .build()
            Datadog.initialize(this, configuration, trackingConsent)
        }
    }
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{% tab "Java" %}}
   ```java
   public class SampleApplication extends Application {
        @Override
        public void onCreate() {
            super.onCreate();
            Configuration configuration =
                    new Configuration.Builder(<CLIENT_TOKEN>, <ENV_NAME>, <APP_VARIANT_NAME>)
                            .useSite(DatadogSite.AP1)
                            .build();
            Datadog.initialize(this, configuration, trackingConsent);
        }
    }
   ```
   {{% /tab %}}
   {{< /tabs >}}
   {{< /site-region >}}

>    To be compliant with the GDPR regulation, the SDK requires the tracking consent value at initialization.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   To be GDPR compliant, the SDK requires the tracking consent value at initialization.
```

>    The tracking consent can be one of the following values [See Tracking Consent][6].:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The tracking consent can be one of the following values [see Tracking Consent][6]:
```

>    To be compliant with the GDPR regulation, the SDK requires the tracking consent value at initialization.
>    The tracking consent can be one of the following values [See Tracking Consent][6].:
>    * `TrackingConsent.PENDING`: The SDK starts collecting and batching the data but does not send it to the data
>      collection endpoint. The SDK waits for the new tracking consent value to decide what to do with the batched data.
>    * `TrackingConsent.GRANTED`: The SDK starts collecting the data and sends it to the data collection endpoint.
>    * `TrackingConsent.NOT_GRANTED`: The SDK does not collect any data. You will not be able to manually send any logs, traces, or
>      RUM events.
> 
>    To update the tracking consent after the SDK is initialized, call: `Datadog.setTrackingConsent(<NEW CONSENT>)`.
>    The SDK changes its behavior according to the new consent. For example, if the current tracking consent is `TrackingConsent.PENDING` and you update it to:
>    * `TrackingConsent.GRANTED`: The SDK sends all current batched data and future data directly to the data collection endpoint.
>    * `TrackingConsent.NOT_GRANTED`: The SDK wipes all batched data and does not collect any future data.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   To be compliant with the GDPR regulation, the SDK requires the tracking consent value at initialization.
   For more information, see [Tracking Consent][6].
```
I don't think we should duplicate the information that already exists in the Tracking Consent section.

   Use the utility method `isInitialized` to check if the SDK is properly initialized:

   ```kotlin
    if (Datadog.isInitialized()) {
        // your code here
    }
   ```
   When writing your application, you can enable development logs by calling the `setVerbosity` method. All internal messages in the library with a priority equal to or higher than the provided level are then logged to Android's Logcat:
   ```kotlin
   Datadog.setVerbosity(Log.INFO)
   ```

3. Configure and enable Trace feature:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
val traceConfig = TraceConfiguration.Builder().build()
Trace.enable(traceConfig)
```
{{% /tab %}}

{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
final TraceConfiguration traceConfig = TraceConfiguration.Builder().build();
Trace.enable(traceConfig);
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}    

> 4. Datadog tracer implements the [Open Telemetry standard][18]. Create the `OtelTracerProvider` and register the `OpenTelemetrySdk` in `GlobalOpenTelemetry` as a singleton instance to be used in your application. We recommend for best practices to do this in your `onCreate()` method.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
4. Datadog tracer implements the [OpenTelemetry standard][18]. Create `OtelTracerProvider` and register `OpenTelemetrySdk` in `GlobalOpenTelemetry` in your `onCreate()` method:
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
GlobalOpenTelemetry.set(object : OpenTelemetry {
    private val tracerProvider = OtelTracerProvider.Builder()
        .setService([BuildConfig.APPLICATION_ID])
        .build()

    override fun getTracerProvider(): TracerProvider {
        return tracerProvider
    }

    override fun getPropagators(): ContextPropagators {
        return ContextPropagators.noop()
    }
})
// and later on if you want to access the tracer provider
val tracerProvider = GlobalOpenTelemetry.get().getTracer(instrumentationName = "<instrumentation_name>")
```
{{% /tab %}}

> {{% tab "Java" %}}
> ```java
> ```
> {{% /tab %}}
> {{% tab "Java" %}}
> ```java
> 
> {{% /tab %}} 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
GlobalOpenTelemetry.set(new OpenTelemetry() {
    private final TracerProvider tracerProvider = new OtelTracerProvider.Builder()
            .setService(BuildConfig.APPLICATION_ID)
            .build();

    @Override
    public TracerProvider getTracerProvider() {
        return tracerProvider;
    }

    @Override
    public ContextPropagators getPropagators() {
        return ContextPropagators.noop();
    }
};
// and later on if you want to access the tracer provider
final TracerProvider tracerProvider = GlobalOpenTelemetry.get().getTracer("<instrumentation_name>");       
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> **Note**: If you decide to set the `GlobalOpenTelemetry.set` API you need to make sure that this is only called one single time in your process otherwise OpenTelemetry will throw an exception. In case you want to avoid that you can just create a `TracerProvider` and use it as a singleton in your project.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**Note**: Ensure `GlobalOpenTelemetry.set` API is only called once per process. Otherwise, you can create a `TracerProvider` and use it as a singleton in your project.
```

> **Note**: The `setService` method is used to set the service name for the tracer provider. The service name is used to identify the application in the Datadog UI. You can either use the `GlobalOpenTelemetry` to hold a single instance of the `TracerProvider` create your own instance and use it in your application code as needed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I think this note is duplicated?

Author: will double check, tks !!

Author: I did not find any duplicate, can you please double check it on your end ?

Reviewer 3: Hey, apologies for not being clearer. I was referring to the overlap between the note on line 382 and 384. Perhaps these could be combined?

```
Ensure the GlobalOpenTelemetry.set API is called only once per process. The setService method is used to set the service name for the tracer provider, which identifies the application in Datadog.

You have two options for managing the TracerProvider instance:

- Use GlobalOpenTelemetry to hold a single instance of the TracerProvider. This ensures that the GlobalOpenTelemetry.set API is called only once per process.
- Create your own instance of the TracerProvider and use it as a singleton in your project. This allows you to manage the instance directly in your application code as needed.
```

5. Instrument your code with the OpenTelemetry API:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
val span = tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "<span_name>").startSpan()
// do something you want to measure ...
// ... then, when the operation is finished:
span.end()
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
final Span span = tracer.spanBuilder("<span_name>").startSpan();
// do something you want to measure ...
// ... then, when the operation is finished:
span.end();
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> 6. (Optional) Set child-parent relationship between your spans:

Reviewer 3: After the setup instructions, I think we should break these steps into sections instead like we recently did here: https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/java/otel/.

Author: I just followed the `iOS` docs that were just merged. I think we should stay consistent in that case:
https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/ios/otel/.

{{< /tabs >}}

8. (Optional) Attach an error to a span:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```kotlin
span.setStatus(StatusCode.ERROR, description = "<error_description>")

// or if you want to set an exception

span.recordException(exception)
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```java
span.setStatus(StatusCode.ERROR, "<error_description>")

// or if you want to set an exception

span.recordException(exception)
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

9. (Optional) Add span links to your span:

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```swift
val linkedSpan = tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "linked span").startSpan()
linkedSpan.end()

val spanWithLinks = tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "span with links")
    .addLink(spanContext = linkedSpan.spanContext)
    .startSpan()
spanWithLinks.end()
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```Java
final Span linkedSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("linked span").startSpan();
linkedSpan.end();

final Span spanWithLinks = tracer.spanBuilder("span with links")
        .addLink(linkedSpan.getSpanContext())
        .startSpan();
spanWithLinks.end();
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

10. (Optional) Add local parent span to the span generated around the OkHttp request in RUM:

> You will first need to add the OpenTelemetry OkHttp extension module to your project dependencies:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
First, you need to add the OpenTelemetry OkHttp extension module to your project dependencies:
```

```groovy
android {
    //(...)
}
dependencies {
    implementation "com.datadoghq:dd-sdk-android-okhttp:x.x.x"
    implementation "com.datadoghq:dd-sdk-android-okhttp-otel:x.x.x"
    //(...)
}
```

> Then once we create an `OkHttp` `Request` we could easilly attach a parent span to the request:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
After you create an `OkHttp` `Request`, you can attach a parent span to the request:
```

{{< tabs >}}
{{% tab "Kotlin" %}}
```swift
val parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder(spanName = "parent span").startSpan()
parentSpan.end()
val request = Request.Builder()
    .url("<URL>")
    .addParentSpan(parentSpan)
    .build()
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{% tab "Java" %}}
```Java
final Span parentSpan = tracer.spanBuilder("parent span").startSpan();
parentSpan.end()
final Request:request = new Request.Builder()
    .url("<URL>")
    .addParentSpan(parentSpan)
    .build();
```
{{% /tab %}}
{{< /tabs >}}

> 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion

## Further reading

{{< partial name="whats-next/whats-next.html" >}}
```
We have to add this for the further reading links to display at the bottom of the page.

Author: question is, do we need the `Further Reading` here or should we remove it and just left the links below ?

Reviewer 3: I think we should use our standard Further reading format to align with the typical structure of our other pages. There are already links listed in the frontmatter at the top of this page, so those will automatically populate at the bottom using that partial I listed. 😄

[1]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-sdk-android/tree/develop/features/dd-sdk-android-trace
[2]: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-sdk-android/tree/develop/features/dd-sdk-android-trace-otel
[3]: https://app.datadoghq.com/rum/application/create

> [4]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#client-tokens

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[4]: /account_management/api-app-keys/#client-tokens
```

> [5]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[5]: /account_management/api-app-keys/#api-keys
```

[6]: /real_user_monitoring/mobile_and_tv_monitoring/troubleshooting/#set-tracking-consent-gdpr-compliance
[7]: /real_user_monitoring/mobile_and_tv_monitoring/advanced_configuration/android/#initialization-parameters
[8]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#span-links
[9]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#attributes
[10]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/concepts/signals/traces/#span-events
[11]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/sdk/#span-processor
[12]: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/reference/specification/trace/sdk/#span-exporter

> [13]: https://docs.datadoghq.com/real_user_monitoring/platform/connect_rum_and_traces/?tab=browserrum#opentelemetry-support

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[13]: /real_user_monitoring/platform/connect_rum_and_traces/?tab=browserrum#opentelemetry-support
```
